3. Determination of moisture content
========================================

3.1 General
----------------------
Water is present in most naturally occurring soils.The amount of water,expressed as a proportion by mass of the dry solid particles, known as the moisture content, has a profound effect on soil behaviour. In this context a soil is 'dry'when no further water can be removed at a temterature not exceeding 110&deg;C.

Moisture content is required as a guide to classification of natural soils and as a control criterion in recompacted soils and is measured on samples used for most field and laboratory tests. The [oven drying method](#3.2) is the definitive procedure used in standard laboratory practice.

**NOTE:** In some situations, for example in the field control of earthworks, a rapid method of measurement of moisture content may be required and a number of rapid methods are available, e.g. the sand bath method, the microwave oven-drying method and the calcuim carbide method. It should not be assumed that these methods are appropriate for all soil types and when they are used on a particular soil some tests should also be carried out using the oven-drying method as a check.

A procedure for determining the [moisture content at full saturation of chalk](#3.3) is described.

<a name="3.2"></a>
### 3.2 Oven-drying method

#### 3.2.1 General

This method covers the determination of the moisture content of a specimen of soil as a percentage of its dry mass.
The requirements of Part 1 of this standard where appropriate, shall apply to this test method.

<a name="3.3"></a>
### 3.3 Method for saturation moisture content of chalk

#### 3.3.1 General

The saturation moisture content of intact chalk lumps can be used, together with the chalk crushing value, to classify chalk in relation to its behaviour as a freshly placed fill material. This test is based on the determination of the dry density of the chalk lump, using the 'Immmersion in water method', and the calculation from it of the potential moisture content at saturation, assuming a value of 2.70 Mg/m3??? for the particle density of the chalk solids.
The requirement of Part 1 of this standard, where appropriate, shall apply to this test method.


### 3.4 Determination of the liquid limit

#### 3.4.1 General

The liquid limit is the empirically established moisture content at which a soil passes from the liquid state to the plastic state. It provides a means of classifying a soil, especially when the plastic limit (see clause 5) is also known.

Two main types of tests are specified. 

1. The first is the cone penetrometer method, which is fundamentally more satisfactory than the alternative because it is essentially a static test depending on soil shear strengh. It is also easier to perform and gives more reproducible results. 
2. The second is the much earlier Casagrande type of test which has been used for many years as a basis for soil classification and correlation of engineering properties. This test
introduces dynamic effects and is more susceptable to discrepancies between operators.

For both types of test an alternative rapid 'one-point' procedure is given, which may give less accurate results.
The method os sample preparation is the same for all of these tests.


