4. Determination of liquid limit
=======================================

4.1 General
----------------------------

The liquid limit is the empirically established moisture content at which a soil passes from the liquid state to the plastic state. It provides a means of classifying a soil, especially when the plastic limit (see [clause 5](/5/)) is also known.

Two main types of tests are specified. 

1. The first is the [cone penetrometer method], which is fundamentally more satisfactory than the alternative because it is essentially a static test depending on soil shear strengh. It is also easier to perform and gives more reproducible results. 
2. The second is the much earlier `Casagrande type` of test which has been used for many years as a basis for soil classification and correlation of engineering properties. The test introduces dynamic effects and is more susceptible to discrepancies between operators.

For both types of test an alternative rapid 'one-point' procedure is given, which may give less accurate results.

The method of sample preparation is the same for all of these tests.

### Cone Pentrometermethod (definitive method)

#### 4.3 General. 

This method covers the determination of the liquid limit of a sample of soil in its natural state, or of a sample of soil from which material retained on a 425pm ??? test sieve has been removed.

NOTE. The method using the cone penetrometer is preferred to that employing the Cassagrande appatatus (see 4.5), as the test is both easier to carry out and is capable of giving more reproducible results. The cone penetrometer apparatus is easier to maintain in correctadjustments and the test procedure is less dependent on the judgment of the operator. The results obtained with the cone penetrometer may differ slightly from those with the Casagrande apparatus, but in most cases up to a liquid limit of 100 these differences will not be significant and will be less than the normal variations likely to be obtained using the Cassagrande appatatus.

The requitements of Part 1 of this standard, where appropriate shall apply to this test method.

###Casagrande apparatus method

#### 4.5 General 

This is an alternative method for the determination of the liquid limit of a sample of natural soil, or a sample of soil from which material  retained on a 425pm??? test sieve has been removed.

NOTE.


TODO:
- Clause 5 link in para 1
- Needto add cone penetrometer method
- Need to add Casagrande type
