7. Determination of density
==============================================

7.1 General
-----------------------

### 7.1.1 Terminology
In this standard, density is expressed in terms of mas density. The bulk density of a soil, p, is the mass per unit volume of the soil deposit including any water it contains. The dry density, pd??? is the mass of dry soil contained in a unit volume. Both are expressed in Mg/m3??? which is numerically the same as g/cm3???

Note. Weight density (unit weight)denoted by y??? is used when calculating the force exerted by a mass of soil, and is derived from the mass density by the equation.

y=pg???

where

g??? is the acceleration due to gravity (in m/s2???)

The value of y???(in kN/m3???) is numerically related to p???(in Mg/m3???) by the equation.

y=9.807p???




7.2 Linear measurement method
----------------------------------

### 7.2.1 General
This method is suitable for the determination of the density of a sample of cohesive soil of regular shape, including specimens prepared for other tests. The samples used are normally in the form of either rectangular prisms or right cylinders.

Three procedures are specified for preparing the specimen,as follows:

Procedure 1.

Cutting and trimmimg a specimen,to a suitable shape from a block sample.
 
Procedure 2.

Extruding from a tube to form a cylindrical specimen of the same diameter as the tube.

Procedure 3.

Obtaining a cylindrical specimen of smaller diameter than the sample tube.

General comments on specimen prepatation are given in clause 8 of BS 1377: Part 1 : 1990

The requirement of Part 1 of this standard, where appropriate, shall apply to this test method. 





7.3 Immersion in water method
-------------------------------------

### 7.3.1 General

This method covers the determiation of the bulk density and dry density of a sample of natural or compacted soil by measuring its mass in air and its apparent mass whan suspended in water. The method can be employed whenever lumps of material of suitable size can be obtained.

NOTE:

Although the sample should preferably be cylindrical or cubical in shape, the test can be carried out quite satisfactory on specimens of other shapes, providing no one dimension is very much smaller than the other two. However, lumps with re-entrant angles should be avoided. As the accuracy of the test depends upon the size of the specimen, it is important that the largest available specimen,compatible with the capacity of the balance, should be used.

The requirements of Part 1 of this standard, where appropriate, shall apply to this test method.








7.4 Water displacement method 
---------------------------------------

### 7.4.1 General

This method covers the determination of the bulk density and dry density of a sample of soil by measuring its water displacement and mass. The method can be employed whenever lumps of material of suitable size can be obtained. 

NOTE, Although the sample should preferably be cylindrical or cubical in shape, the test can be carried out quite satisfactorily on specimens of other shapes, providing no one dimension is very much smaller than the other two. However, lumps with re-entrant angles should be avoided. As the accuracy of the test depends upon the size of the specimen, it is important that the largest available specimen compatible with the capacity of the balance and of the siphon container should be used.

The requirements of Part 1 of this standard, where appropriate, shall apply to the test method.

