8. Detmination of particle density
==============================================

8.1 General
-------------------------

Terminology. In this standard the term particle density is used instead of the term specific gravity, which was used in the previous editions of this standard, to comply with current usage in other standards. It is denoted by the symbol ps???. In this standard particle density is quoted in Mg/m3??? which is numerically equal to the specific gravity.

8.2 Gas Jar Method 
-------------------------------
### 8.2.1 General. 

This method is suitable for soil containing up to 10% of particles retained on a 37.5mm test sieve. Coarse particles in excess of this should be brocken down to less than this size before testing. If these particles contain internal voids, tests on the brocken-down material could lead to results different from those given by tests on the whole material. 

The requirement of Part 1 of this standard, where appropriate shall apply to this test method.



8.3 Small pyknometer method
---------------------------------------

### 8.3.1 General

This method is suitable for soils consisting of particles finer that 2mm. Larger particles may be ground down to smaller than this size before testing. It these paticles contain internal voids, tests on the broken-down material could lead to results different from those given by tests on the whole material.

The requirements of Part 1 of this standard, where appropriate, shall apply to this test method.


8.4 Lare pyknometer method 
-------------------------------------------

### 8.4.1 General

This method is suitable for use in a laboratory with limited facilities. It is satisfactory for non-cohesive soils containing particles finer than 20mm. Coarser particles should be broken down to less than this size before testing. If these particles contain internal voids, tests on the broken-down material could lead to results different from those given by tests of the whole material.

This method is less accurate than the gas jar method specified in [8.2](#8.2) and is not suitable for clay soils.

The requirements of Part 1 of this standard, where appropriate, shall apply to this test method.









