9. Determination of particle size distribution
==============================================

9.1 General
------------------------

Two methods of sieving are specified.

1. [Wet sieving](#9.2) is the defintive method applicable to essentially cohesionless soil.
2. [Dry sieving](#9.3) is suitable only for soil containing insignificant quantities of silt and clay.

Two methods of determining the size distribution of fine particles down to the clay size by sedimentation are specified, namely the pipette method and the hydrometer method, in both of which the density of the soil suspension at various intervals is measured.

Combined sieving and sedimentation procedures enable a continuous partice size distribution curve of a soil to be plotted from the size of the coarsest partice down to the clay size.
 
<a name="9.2"></a>
9.2 Wet sieving method
--------------------

### 9.2.1 General
This method covers the quantitative determination of the particle size distribution in an essentially cohesionless soil, down to the fine sand size. The combined silt and clay fraction can be obtained by difference.

The procedure given involves preparation of the sample by wet sieving to remove silt and clay-sized particles, which are rejected, followed by dry sieving of the remaining coarser material.

If the soil does not contain particies retained on a 2mm test sieve in significant quantity, the method specified in [9.4](#9.4) or [9.5](#9.5) can be used.

The requirement of Part 1 of this standard, where appropriate, shall apply to the test method.




<a name="9.3"></a>
9.3 Dry sieving method
-------------------------
 
### 9.3.1 General

This method covers the quantitative determination of the particle size distribution in a cohesionless soil down to the fine-sand size. This method shall not be used unless it has been shown that for the type of material under test it gives the same results as the method of analysis by wet sieving. In cases of doubt the method shall not be used.

The requirements of Part 1 of this standard, where appropriate, shall apply to this test method.



<a name="9.4"></a>
9.4 Sedimentation by the pipette method
--------------------------------------
### 9.4.1 General

This method covers the quantitative determination of the particle size distribution in a soil fromthe course sand size to the clay size (about 2uns???). (See note) The procedure enables the percentages of coarse, medium and fine silt, and clay to be determind. These percentages can be linked to the curve obtained by sieving to provide a single curve for the whole material.

The analysis of data requires that the particle density of the soil specimen is known or can be assumed.

The test as specified is not usually necessary if less than 10% of the material passes the 63 um??? test sieve as specified in [9.2](#9.2)

NOTE. If the sample has been wet sieved down to the 63um ??? test sieve size then only the material passing the 63um??? test sieve need be used to carry out this test, thus eliminating the necessity of repesting the determinations of the same fractions.

The requirements of Page 1 of this standard, where appropriate, shall apply to this test method.



<a name="9.5"></a>
9.5 Sedimentation by the hydrometer method
---------------------------------------------

### 9.5.1 General

This method covers the quantitative determination of the particle size distribution in a soil from the coarse sand size to the clay size.

NOTE.If the sample has been wet sieved down to the 63um??? test sieve size then only the material passing the 63um??? test sieve need be used tocarry out this test, thus eliminating the necessity of repeating the determinations of the same fractions.

The analysis of data requires that the particle density of the soil specimen is known or can be assumed.

The test sd described is not usually necessary if less than 10% of the material passes the 63um ??? test sieve when measured as specified in 9.2

The requirements of Part 1 of this standard, where appropriate, shall apply to this test method.




